Migration docs (#529)
software-mansion/protostar: website/docs/tutorials/06-deploying/02-migrations/README.md

---
sidebar_label: Migrations
---

# Migrations

:::warning
This feature is actively developed. Many new additions or changes will land in future Protostar releases.
:::

> Migrations are Cairo files that help you deploy contracts to the StarkNet network. They are especially useful, when your project consists of multiple contracts. Migration code is mainly written in hints. Protostar injects special functions into hints' scope, which you can use to interact with the StarkNet. These functions are similar to cheatcodes used to test contracts, hence in this document we will refer to these functions as Migration Cheatcodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Migrations are Cairo files that help you manage conntracts on the StarkNet. They are especially useful, when your project consists of multiple contracts. Migration code is mainly written in hints. Protostar injects special functions into hints' scope, which you can use to interact with the StarkNet. These functions are similar to cheatcodes used to test contracts, hence in this document we will refer to these functions as migration cheatcodes.
```
Not only deploy, we shouldn't capitilize migration cheatcodes

:::info

> Protostar aims to make Migration Cheatcodes a subset of Testing Cheatcodes in order to allow testing migration scripts against Protostar's StarkNet. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Protostar aims to make migration cheatcodes a subset of testing cheatcodes in order to allow testing migration scripts against Protostar's local StarkNet. 
```
Shouldn't capitilize, testing cheatcodes aren't defined

:::

## Creating a migration file

> You can create a migration file anywhere, but we recommend creating them inside a `migrations` directory. Currently, Protostar doesn't enforce any naming convention for migration files. We recommend name: `migration_NUMBER_TITLE.cairo`, for example `migration_01_init.cairo`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can create a migration file anywhere, but we recommend creating them inside a `migrations` directory. Currently, Protostar doesn't enforce any naming convention for migration files. In this tutorial we use a naming convention: `migration_NUMBER_TITLE.cairo`, for example `migration_01_init.cairo`.
```

:::info
You can't import a Cairo file, if its name starts with a digit. In the future, you might import your migration files for testing purposes.

> :::

Reviewer: I think it's a bit unnecessary information. We shouldn't explain cairo syntax here to avoid clutter.

## Migration file structure
Each migration should have 2 functions: `up` and `down`. The `up` function is responsible to migrate your project forward,  and the `down`function is executed to rollback changes.

> ```python title="'up' and 'down' functions must be decorated with '@external' decorator"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```python title="'up' and 'down' functions must be decorated with '@external' decorator"
```
I would put this information in paragraph above, its essential and title is easy to overlook

%lang starknet

@external
func up():
    %{ declare("./build/main.json") %}
    return ()
end

@external
func down():
    %{ assert False, "Not implemented" %}
    return ()
end

``` 

> 

Reviewer: Should we provide an warning that you cannot use deploy syscall in migrations and why?

## Running the migration

> To run the migration execute the `migrate` command. We recommend specifying the migration output directory to save class hashes and contract addresses.

Reviewer: If I don't specify output dir what will happen? I think it should output to top-level dir? This is behaviour I am used to

Author: It will do nothing. Somebody may run the migration against devnet. Creating the output will be annoying in such scenario.

Author: I'll make the argument `output-dir` required in a different PR.

Reviewer: Can we make a discussion about it on dev channel? I am not sure if we should make it required tbh

Author: Then, I'll leave as it is. You can start the thread if you want to discuss that.

Reviewer: Sure, please next time elaborate on your decision if you can.

 I have no idea what are the reasons behind such decision at this point...

```text title="Running the migration to the testnet"
$ protostar migrate migrations/migration_01_init.cairo
                    --network alpha-goerli
                    --output-dir migrations/testnet
```

:::tip
Run `protostar migrate --help` to display all parameters supported by this command.
:::

> Protostar asks, if you build the project to prevent you from running the migrate on outdated build output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Protostar asks, if you build the project to prevent you from running the migrate on an outdated build output.
```

```text title="Type 'y' to continue"
Did you build the project before running this command? [y/n]: 
```

:::tip
Run `protostar migrate` with the `--no-confirm` flag to skip this check.
:::

> If you build the project, Protostar will print the data flow in the command line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you build the project, Protostar will print migration logs in the command line.
```
